Add example and clarifications for Context step (#9565)
braze-inc/braze-docs: _docs/_user_guide/engagement_tools/canvas/canvas_components/context.md

# Context

> Use Context steps to create or update a set of variables that represent the context of a user (or insights into that user’s behavior) as they move through a Canvas. Each context variable includes a name, data type, and a value that can include Liquid. By setting context as part of your user journey, you can delay messages or filter users based on context variables.

{% alert important %}
Context steps are currently in early access. Contact your Braze account manager if you're interested in participating in this early access.
{% endalert %}

> ## How context works

Reviewer: i noticed that context is sometimes capitalized and sometimes not. it might be good to re-review all uses and ensure its consistent throughout the doc 👍🏽

Author: Noted! Operating by this rule: when referring to the step, it's "Context step" and in all other instances, it's "context" like "context variable"

Reviewer: for my own learning purposes, is there a reason why Context step is capitalized but variable isn't?

Author: Yeah! All Canvas components/steps are capitalized (like User Update step, Message step). Originally, I believe it was "Context variable" aka capitalized in the earlier iterations, but PM suggested to go with "context variable" instead

# Context

> > Use Context steps to create or update a set of variables that represent the context of a user (or insights into that user’s behavior) as they move through a Canvas. Each context variable includes a name, data type, and a value that can include Liquid. By setting context as part of your user journey, you can delay messages or filter users based on context variables.

Reviewer 2: From reading this article, it feels as if the most important thing about Context steps is that they create "temporary data" on a user profile. You don't have to assign an attribute to a user profile forever. You can just do it for the purpose of the Canvas that you are creating.

> > Use Context steps to create or update a set of variables that represent the context of a user (or insights into that user’s behavior) as they move through a Canvas. Each context variable includes a name, data type, and a value that can include Liquid. By setting context as part of your user journey, you can delay messages or filter users based on context variables.

Author: An error from copy and pasting, will fix this

> > Use Context steps to create or update a set of variables that represent the context of a user (or insights into that user’s behavior) as they move through a Canvas. Each context variable includes a name, data type, and a value that can include Liquid. By setting context as part of your user journey, you can delay messages or filter users based on context variables.

Author: Made edits based on suggestions + feedback from Slack

{% alert important %}
Context steps are currently in early access. Contact your Braze account manager if you're interested in participating in this early access.
{% endalert %}

> ## How context works

Author: Noted, revising this header to be "How it works"

> Each Context step is composed of a variable name and associated data type, or context variables. These variables will follow a user through their Canvas journey and can be accessed using the Liquid `context`.

Reviewer 2: Are these just key value pairs?

Author: Technically, yes I think 🤔

> Each Context step is composed of a variable name and associated data type, or context variables. These variables will follow a user through their Canvas journey and can be accessed using the Liquid `context`.

Reviewer 2: What does "can be accessed using the Liquid `context`." mean? I don't understand this line yet.

Reviewer 2: "Context variables" are used 34 times in the article but aren't defined, and aren't used in any other article. Please define the term as a first step in this article.

Author: Made edits to the intro paragraph + this paragraph to better clearly define the term "context variable" — haven't pushed my changes yet but this is the preview:

```
## How it works

Each Context step defines a context variable, which is a variable that follows a user throughout their user journey in a Canvas. A context variable includes a variable name and an associated data type. This variable can be referenced in a Canvas using the Liquid snippet {% raw %}`{{context.${example_variable_name}}}`{% endraw %}.
```

Reviewer 2: That's good! Small suggestion - what do you think of defining it without repeating the word "variable"?

> Each Context step defines a context variable: a piece of custom data that only follows a user throughout their user journey in this Canvas. 

If Bre is back tomorrow, might check this wording with her. This is the stuff she's great at!

{% alert note %}
You can define up to 10 context variables for each Context step.
{% endalert %}

![A Context step as the first step of a Canvas.][1]{: style="float:right;max-width:40%;margin-left:15px;"}

There are two ways to set context variables:

> - **At Canvas entry:** Variables of events or API calls that trigger a user’s entry into a Canvas are stored as context variables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **At Canvas entry:** Variables from events or API calls that trigger a user’s entry into a Canvas are stored as context variables.
```

- **Using a Context step:** You can create or update context variables in the step editor.

> Any variables included in the context variable aren’t automatically stored in the user profile, as context variables exist only within the context of a user’s journey through a Canvas. This means a user can have different context variables each time they enter a Canvas. For example, if you have a Canvas that manages flight bookings, you could use a context variable to store a different flight confirmation code each time a user enters the Canvas.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph _is_ the introduction, I think. This is exactly what I was trying to get at there.

The content of the introduction can be moved here or cut.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any variables included in the context variable aren’t permanently stored in the user profile. Context variables exist only within the user’s journey through the Canvas, providing a lightweight way to define data without adding to user profiles. This means a user can have different context variables each time they enter the Canvas. For example, if you have a Canvas that manages flight bookings, you could use a context variable to store a different flight confirmation code each time a user enters the Canvas.
```

Author: Added your suggestions and removed that first sentence, "Any variables included in the context variable aren’t permanently stored in the user profile." based on the GDoc

Author: Shifted to the intro based on Slack DM

> ## Creating a context step

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Creating a Context step
```

### Step 1: Create a step

> Add a step to your Canvas, then drag and drop the component from the sidebar, or select the <i class="fas fa-plus-circle"></i> plus button and select **Context**.

Reviewer: can we add a screenshot here? also might be good to hyperlink "add a step to your canvas" or add an alert that links to the full walkthrough for those that don't know how.

### Step 2: Define the variable

To define Context step's variable:

1. Give your context variable a name.

> 2. Select a data type. For the full list, see [Context variable types](#context-variable-types).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Select a [data type](#context-variable-types). 
```

> 3. Enter a Liquid expression or select **Add Personalization**.

Reviewer 2: I couldn't understand why you would add a Liquid expression or select "Add Personalization" so I experimented a bit. 

The Add Personalization step creates a Liquid snippet out of an existing attributes. So, for instance, I could add the user's name. 

I'd recommend breaking step 3 out into two substeps. Either the user can 3.1: Create a Liquid snippet from scratch or 3.2: Have Braze create a Liquid snippet from pre-existing attributes

(Need to be rewritten for clarity, but that's the idea.)

4. To view the context variable, select **Preview**.
5. When you're finished, select **Done**.

Now you can use your Context variable anywhere you use Liquid, such as in Message and User Update steps, by selecting **Add Personalization**. For a full walkthrough, see [Using a context variable](#using-context-variables).

> ### Context variable types {#context-variable-types}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Context variable types {#context-variable-types}
```

just a heads up: its important to not nest variable types under a how-to section since it's reference content itself, so this should be an H2.

Author: Noted!

Canvas Context variables that are created or updated in the step can be assigned the following data types:

> - Boolean

Reviewer 2: Because the data types have troubleshooting implications (I set "Date" but wrote it out as a string "January 01"), we should specify what values are allowed for each. 

These are standard throughout Braze, I assume? Are these defined anywhere? 

If they are defined in one specific place, we should link to that. If they aren't (yet), for this instance, let's do this:
Make the list of data types into a table with three columns.
Column 1: Data type
Column 2: Format (expected format, values allowed)
Column 3: Examples (as real world as we can make them)

- Number
- String
- Array
- Time
- Object

> {% alert note %}

Reviewer 2: This feels more like a troubleshooting callout than just a note. Should we make this a header called Troubleshooting instead of a note callout?

Reviewer 2: I think adding a Troubleshooting section would speak towards the "Unhappy paths are documented" step from the [checklist](https://confluence.braze.com/spaces/PDT/pages/502827180/Launching+new+documentation). 

The content from Step 3 is also relevant for this section.

Author: Added a troubleshooting section, haven't pushed my changes yet, but here's a preview
```
## Troubleshooting

### Mismatched data types

If the Liquid expression at runtime returns a value that doesn't match the data type, the context variable won't be updated. For example, if the data type is set to **Number** but the value returns a string, the variable won't be updated, and the following will occur:

- The user will either advance to the next step or exit if it's the last step in the Canvas. 
- The Canvas step analytics will count this as _Not Updated_.

Refer to [Context variable data types](#context-variable-types) for the expected values and examples for each data type.
```

> If the Liquid expression at runtime returns a value that doesn’t match the type, the context variable won’t be updated. For example, if the data type is set to **Number** but is set to a string instead, the variable won’t be updated, meaning the user will either advance to the next step or exit if it’s the last step in the Canvas. For the Canvas step analytics, it will be counted as _Not Updated_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the Liquid expression at runtime returns a value that doesn’t match the type, the context variable won’t be updated. For example, if the data type is set to **Number** but the value is set to a string instead, the variable won’t be updated, meaning the user will either advance to the next step or exit if it’s the last step in the Canvas. The Canvas step analytics will count this as _Not Updated_.
```

{% endalert %}

### Step 3: Test exit criteria (optional)

> If the context variable is valid, then you can reference the variables throughout your Canvas. However, your users can exit the steps in a user journey after a Context step for the following reasons:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the context variables are valid, you can reference the variables throughout your Canvas. However, your users can exit the steps in a user journey after a Context step for the following reasons:
```

- The context variable doesn't return any value (is null).
- A call to an embedded Connected Content fails.
- The context variable types don't match.

We recommend testing and [previewing your user paths]({{site.baseurl}}/user_guide/engagement_tools/canvas/testing_canvases/preview_user_paths) to make sure your messages are sent to the right audience.

> ## Using context variables

Reviewer 2: Please add an anchor tag to support the link above.

> ## Using context variables

Reviewer 2: This is a pretty good example.

# Context

> > Use Context steps to create or update a set of variables for a user as they move through a Canvas. <br><br>Context variables exist only within the user's journey through the Canvas, providing a lightweight way to define data without adding to user profiles. This means a user can have different context variables each time they enter the Canvas. <br><br>For example, if you have a Canvas that manages flight bookings, you could use a context variable to store a different flight confirmation code each time a user enters the Canvas.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Use Context steps to create or update a set of variables for a user as they move through a Canvas. <br><br>Context variables exist only within the user's journey through the Canvas, providing a lightweight way to define data without adding to user profiles. This means a user can have different context variables each time they enter the Canvas. For example, if you have a Canvas that manages flight bookings, you could use a context variable to store a different flight confirmation code each time a user enters the Canvas.
```

{% alert important %}
Context steps are currently in early access. Contact your Braze account manager if you're interested in participating in this early access.
{% endalert %}

## How it works

![A Context step as the first step of a Canvas.][1]{: style="float:right;max-width:40%;margin-left:15px;"}

> Each Context step defines a context variable: a piece of custom data that only follows a user throughout their user journey in this Canvas. A context variable includes a variable name and an associated data type, and can be referenced in a Canvas using the Liquid snippet {% raw %}`{{context.${example_variable_name}}}`{% endraw %}.

Reviewer 3: > Each Context step defines a context variable

Something I think we could make more explicit here is that one context step can contain multiple variables. This kinda reads like a 1-1 relationship here. In general in this "How it works" section, I wonder if we might want touch on a high level, each of the parts of the variable we define in more detail later in the document. I worry about including more explanatory information in the intro sentence callout quote thing, since I think that is commonly glossed over. We usually reserve that for "this is what this article is about", rather than "this is an explanation", right? 

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e75407cc-4ca7-4a32-b359-41d1cfb668f4)
My biggest feedback here is let's make the "How it works" section serve more like an introduction to beginners. Familiar users can skip this section because it is clearly labeled.

I took a pass at pulling some things from throughout the article up into here to show what I mean. How would you feel about something like this? Feel free to adjust however you like.

```
## How it works
Canvas Context steps allow you to create or update one or more Context variables as users move through a Canvas. A Context variable is a temporary piece of custom data that exists only during a user’s journey through that specific Canvas. It does not persist across different Canvases or outside the journey where it is created.

Each Context step can define multiple Context variables, providing a flexible way to personalize delays, segment users dynamically, and enrich messaging without permanently changing a user’s profile data.

For example, if you are managing flight bookings, you could create a Context variable for each user’s scheduled flight time. You could then set delays relative to each user’s flight time and send personalized reminders from the same Canvas.

You can set Context variables in two ways:

- **At Canvas entry:** When users enter a Canvas, data from the event or API trigger can automatically populate Context variables.
- **In a Context step:** You can define or update Context variables manually inside the Canvas by adding a Context step.

Each Context variable includes:
- A name (such as `flight_time` or `subscription_renewal_date`)
- A data type (such as number, string, time, or array)
- A value you assign using [Liquid]({{site.baseurl}}/user_guide/personalization_and_dynamic_content/liquid/) or through the **Add Personalization** tool.

Once defined, you can use a Context variable throughout the Canvas by referencing it in this format: {% raw %}`{{context.${example_variable_name}}}`{% endraw %}.

For example:
{% raw %}`{{context.${flight_time}}}{% endraw %}` could return the user’s scheduled flight time.

Each time a user enters the Canvas—even if they have entered it before—the Context variables will be redefined based on the latest entry data and Canvas setup. This allows journeys to stay personalized and accurate, even for users with multiple entries.
```

Author: > Something I think we could make more explicit here is that one context step can contain multiple variables.

Agreed! 

> I worry about including more explanatory information in the intro sentence callout quote thing, since I think that is commonly glossed over

I believe the intention was to provide an explanation and example (upfront) to explain the step and the concept of context variables. I do agree that it could be glossed over, I can wordsmith this to highlight an example and keep it as a brief "this is what this article is about", maybe something like:

```
Use Context steps to create or update a set of variables for a user as they move through a Canvas. For example, if you have a Canvas that manages flight bookings, you could use a context variable to store a different flight confirmation code each time a user enters the Canvas.
```

Also, to your point, use the "How it works" section as a place to dive more into the explanation (and an example different from the callout quote thing)  🤔

Author: Going to make some edits now based on your feedback!

There are two ways to set context variables:

- **At Canvas entry:** Variables from events or API calls that trigger a user's entry into a Canvas are stored as context variables.
- **Using a Context step:** You can create or update context variables in the step editor.

## Creating a Context step

### Step 1: Add a step

Add a step to your Canvas, then drag and drop the component from the sidebar, or select the <i class="fas fa-plus-circle"></i> plus button and select **Context**.

> ### Step 2: Define the variable

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Step 2: Define the variables
```

Reviewer 3: Suggestion here and below to make it more clear about adding multiple per step if desired

Author: Noted, makes sense, especially since the example shows 2 context variables in a step 😥

To define Context step's variable:

> 1. Give your context variable a name.
> 2. Select a [data type](#context-variable-types).
> 3. Write a Liquid expression or select **Add Personalization** to create a Liquid snippet from pre-existing attributes.
> 4. To view the context variable, select **Preview**.
> 5. When you're finished, select **Done**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To define a Context variable:

1. Give your Context variable a **name**.
2. Select a **data type** (such as string, number, array, etc.).
3. Write a Liquid expression manually or use **Add Personalization** to create a Liquid snippet from pre-existing attributes.
4. Select **Preview** to check the value of your Context variable.
5. (Optional) To additional variables, select **Add Context variable** and repeat steps 1–4.  
5. When you're finished, select **Done**.
```

|---|---|
|Boolean| {::nomarkdown}<ul><li><b>Context variable name:</b> loyalty_program</li><li><b>Value:</b> {% raw %}<code>{{custom_attribute.${active_member}}}</code>{% endraw %}</li><li><b>Expected value:</b> `true`</li></ul>{:/} |
|Number| {::nomarkdown}<ul><li><b>Context variable name:</b> credit_score</li><li><b>Value:</b> {% raw %}<code>{{custom_attribute.${Credit Score}}}</code>{% endraw %}</li><li><b>Expected value:</b> 751</li></ul>{:/} |
|String| {::nomarkdown}<ul><li><b>Context variable name:</b> product_name</li><li><b>Value:</b> {% raw %}<code>{{custom_attribute.${Product}}}</code>{% endraw %}</li><li><b>Expected value:</b> lotion</li></ul>{:/} |
|Array| {::nomarkdown}<ul><li><b>Context variable name:</b> favorite_products</li><li><b>Value:</b> {% raw %}<code>{{custom_attribute.${Favorites}}}</code>{% endraw %}</li><li><b>Expected value:</b> <code>["moisturizer", "serum", "lipstick"]</code></li></ul>{:/} |
|Time| {::nomarkdown}<ul><li><b>Context variable name:</b> last_purchase_date</li><li><b>Value:</b> {% raw %}<code>{{custom_attribute.${Last Purchase Date}}}</code>{% endraw %}</li><li><b>Expected value:</b> 2025-01-28T17:02:43.032Z</li></ul>{:/} |

> |Object| {::nomarkdown}<ul><li><b>Context variable name:</b> customer_profile</li><li><b>Value:</b> {% raw %}<code>{{custom_attribute.${Product}}}</code>{% endraw %}</li><li><b>Expected value:</b> lotion</li></ul>{:/} |

Reviewer 3: IDK if we do this elsewhere, but since we explicitly mention that they don't support nested objects, I wonder if we should add a qualifier to the data type name here, like "flattened" https://www.30secondsofcode.org/js/s/flatten-unflatten-object/
```suggestion
|Object (flattened) | {::nomarkdown}<ul><li><b>Context variable name:</b> customer_profile</li><li><b>Value:</b> {% raw %}<code>{{custom_attribute.${Product}}}</code>{% endraw %}</li><li><b>Expected value:</b> lotion</li></ul>{:/} |
```

For example, if you're managing flight bookings, you could create a context variable for each user's scheduled flight time. You could then set delays relative to each user’s flight time and send personalized reminders from the same Canvas.

You can set context variables in two ways:

- **At Canvas entry:** When users enter a Canvas, data from the event or API trigger can automatically populate context variables.
- **In a Context step:** You can define or update context variables manually inside the Canvas by adding a Context step.

Each context variable includes:

- A name (such as `flight_time` or `subscription_renewal_date`)
- A [data type](#context-variable-types) (such as number, string, time, or array)
- A value you assign using [Liquid]({{site.baseurl}}/user_guide/personalization_and_dynamic_content/liquid/) or through the **Add Personalization** tool.

When defined, you can use a context variable throughout the Canvas by referencing it in this format: {% raw %}`{{context.${example_variable_name}}}`{% endraw %}.

For example,
{% raw %}`{{context.${flight_time}}}{% endraw %}` could return the user’s scheduled flight time.

> Each time a user enters the Canvas&#8212;even if they have entered it before&#8212;the Context variables will be redefined based on the latest entry data and Canvas setup. This allows journeys to stay personalized and accurate, even for users with multiple entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each time a user enters the Canvas&#8212;even if they have entered it before&#8212;the context variables will be redefined based on the latest entry data and Canvas setup. This allows journeys to stay personalized and accurate, even for users with multiple entries.
```

## Creating a Context step

### Step 1: Add a step

Add a step to your Canvas, then drag and drop the component from the sidebar, or select the <i class="fas fa-plus-circle"></i> plus button and select **Context**.

### Step 2: Define the variables

> To define Context step's variable:

Reviewer: looks like this is a dupe of the next line, not sure which one you want to keep 👍🏽

To define a context variable:

1. Give your context variable a **name**.
2. Select a [data type](#context-variable-types).
3. Write a Liquid expression manually or use **Add Personalization** to create a Liquid snippet from pre-existing attributes.
4. Select **Preview** to check the value of your context variable.
5. (Optional) To additional variables, select **Add Context variable** and repeat steps 1–4.
5. When you're finished, select **Done**.

{% alert note %}

> You can define up to 10 context variables for each Context step.

Reviewer: i'd personally move this alert to the very top of this H2, like:

```
## Step 2: Define the variables

{% alert note %}
You can define up to 10 context variables for each Context step.
{% endalert %}

To define a context variable:
```

### Step 3: Test exit criteria (optional)

If the context variables are valid, you can reference the variables throughout your Canvas. However, your users can exit the steps in a user journey after a Context step for the following reasons:

- The context variable doesn't return any value (is null).
- A call to an embedded Connected Content fails.
- The context variable types don't match.

We recommend testing and [previewing your user paths]({{site.baseurl}}/user_guide/engagement_tools/canvas/testing_canvases/preview_user_paths) to make sure your messages are sent to the right audience.

## Context variable data types {#context-variable-types}

Context variables that are created or updated in the step can be assigned the following data types.

{% alert note %}
Context variables have the same expected formats for data types as [custom events]({{site.baseurl}}/user_guide/data/custom_data/custom_events/#expected-format), but context variables do not support nested objects.
{% endalert %}

> | Data type | Example context variable setup |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Data type | Example variable name | Example value |
```

Since all of the proceeding cells have variable name and value, it might make more sense to split these into different columns. also makes copy+paste much easier when putting code in non-shared cell:
```
Boolean | loyalty_program |`{{custom_attribute.${active_member}}}` |
```

- Boolean
- Number
- String
- Array
- Time
- Object

Note that if the Liquid expression at runtime returns a value that doesn’t match the type, the context variable won’t be updated. For example, if the context variable data type is set to **Number** but the value can’t be parsed as a number and is a string instead, the variable won’t be updated, and the following will occur:

- The user will either advance to the next step or exit the Canvas if it’s the last step in the Canvas. 
- For the Canvas step analytics, this is counted as _Not Updated_. 

### How users can exit subsequent steps

If the context variable is valid, then you can reference the variables throughout your Canvas. However, your users can exit the steps in a user journey after a Context step for the following reasons:

- The context variable doesn't return any value (is null).
- A call to an embedded Connected Content fails.
- The context variable types don't match.

We recommend testing and [previewing your user paths]({{site.baseurl}}/user_guide/engagement_tools/canvas/testing_canvases/preview_user_paths) to make sure your messages are sent to the right audience.

## JSON types and Connected Content responses

> For consistency and error prevention, JSON returned by a Connected Content call will be evaluated as a string data type. If you want to convert this string into JSON, convert it by using `as_json_string`. An example is:

Reviewer: can we update this line to avoid passive voice? is braze evaluating the string? (i'm assuming this is the case, but just want to be sure).

```
{%endraw%}

## Frequently asked questions

### How do context variables differ from Canvas entry properties?

If you’re participating in the Context step early access, Canvas entry properties are now part of Canvas context variables, meaning `canvas_entry_properties` is now referenced as `context`. This also means you can send Canvas entry properties using the Braze API and reference them in other steps, similar to using a context variable with the Liquid snippet.

### Can variables reference each other in a singular Context step?

Yes. All variables in a Context step are evaluated in a sequence, meaning you could have the following context variables setup:

| Context variable | Liquid | Description |
|---|---|---|

> |`favorite_restaurants`| {% raw %}`{{user.favorite_categories}}`{% endraw %} | A user's favorite restaurant category. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|`favorite_restaurants`| {% raw %}`{{user.favorite_categories}}`{% endraw %} | A user's favorite restaurant. |
```

|`promo_code`| {% raw %}`{{user.favorite_categories}}`{% endraw %} | The available discount code for a user. |
|`personalized_message`|  {% raw %}`"Enjoy a discount of" {{promo_code}} "on delivery from your favorite" {{favorite_restaurants}} restaurants!"`{% endraw %} | A personalized message that combines the previous variables. |
{: .reset-td-br-1 .reset-td-br-2 .reset-td-br-3 role="presentation" }

> In a Message step, you could use the Liquid snippet {% raw %}`{{context.${personalize_message}}}`{% endraw %} to reference the context variable to deliver a personalized message to each user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a Message step, you could use the Liquid snippet {% raw %}`{{context.${personalized_message}}}`{% endraw %} to reference the context variable to deliver a personalized message to each user.
```

Reviewer 2: I referenced this based on "personalized_message" above. Please ensure this is correct.
